# Bluetooth Payment Protocol

This document specifies a protocol for communicating and authorizing Interledger Payment Requests over Bluetooth (Low Energy). It is primarily intended for use in in-person retail payment contexts.

This protocol may be implemented on Customer devices such as smartphones or very low-power offline devices as our example[tapFi](https://github.com/joaopedrovbs/tapFi). It is intended for online payments, but can work with offline payments with a few changes to the IPR described [here](https://github.com/joaopedrovbs/tapFi#ipr).

Once a Customer becomes active by broadcasting it's payment service over BLE, Merchants can connect
and request signature for payments over a secure Bluetooth channel. The channel is closed once
a payment is signed or the Customer cancels the purshase for security or authentication reasons.

## Definitions

- `IPR`: [Interledger Payment Request](../0011-interledger-payment-request/0011-interledger-payment-request.md)
- `Merchant`: The one requesting a payment
- `Customer`: The one authorizing and remitting payment
- `Connection`: Short time binding between `Merchant` and `Customer`
- `ILP Account`: An account on a Interledger-enabled ledger
- `ILP Address`: [Interledger](../0015-ilp-addresses/0015-ilp-addresses.md) address in the form of `g.us.somebank.youraccount`
- `Merchant Certificate Authority`: Like CA's for TLS certificates, Merchant CAs sign the certificates of trusted merchants. CAs MUST maintain blacklists of compromised keys
- `Redemption URI`: URI where the Merchant can submit Customer-authorized IPRs to initiate an ILP payment to their account (Note: the service that implements this MUST store previously redeemed IPRs to avoid duplicate payments)
- `Write Long Characteristic`: GATT Sub-Procedure that Writes to Characteristics with more than 20 bytes


## GATT Services: BLE Description
> Generic Attribute Profile (GATT) is how information is transmited between connected BLE devices, by
exposing Services that contains Characteristics. Each Characteristic works like a single "register".

#### ILP Account Information
> Service that provides identity of the Customer

**Characteristics:**

- `name`: (Read)


#### ILP Payment Request

> Service that enables Merchant to issue payment requests to Customer

*Characteristics:*

- `:status`: (Read | Notify)
  - __waiting__: Initial state. Always reset on new connection.
  - __invalid__: Payment failed because the IPR did not pass validation by the Customer's device.
  - __authenticating__: IPR has passed the Customer device's validation and is now waiting for user authorization.
  - __unauthenticated__: Payment was canceled because of invalid password
  - __canceled__: Payment was canceled by the Customer. 
  - __complete__: Payment complete. Read `:iprAuthorization` for the signed packet
- `:action` (Write)
  - __sign__: Initiate signing after `:packet`, `:packetSignature`, `:merchantPublicKey` and `:merchantCertificate` have been written.
- `:ipr`: (Write Long Characteristic)
  - IPR Packet generated by the merchant
- `:merchantSignature`: (Write Long Characteristic)
  - Merchant signature on IPR.
- `:merchantPublicKey`: (Write Long Characteristic)
- `:merchantCertificate`: (Write Long Characteristic)
- `:iprSignature`: (Read Long Characteristic)
  - Customer output of signature of IPR
- `:iprPublicKey`: (Read Long Characteristic)
  - Customer own public key
- `:iprURI`: (Read Long Characteristic)
  - Customer output of the Redemption URI to fulfill the payment

## Merchant Setup

1. Merchant generates certificate with Ed25519 public key
2. Merchant submits certificate, ILP account address, and per-payment limit to a Merchant Certificate Authority
3. Certificate Authority signs merchant details

## Customer Device Setup

1. Device manufacturer embeds unique Ed25519 public / private key pair in device. The manufacturer MUST ensure the device is tamper-proof.
2. Device manufacturer signs the device public key with their own key pair.
3. Customer submits the device public key and manufacturer's signature to their ledger operator to authorize the device to spend funds from their account.
4. If the device manufacturer is trusted to produce secure devices, the ledger operator signs the device public key and a per-payment spending limit with their own key.
5. Customer stores the ledger operator's signature, certificate, per-payment and total spending limit on the device.
   If the Ledger/Account is already know at time of shipping the device, it could be shipped with those pre-stored on the device.

### Payment Flow

**[MERC]** indicates steps taken by the Merchant

**[CUST]** indicates steps taken by the Customer's device

1. **[MERC]** Listen to Broadcasts of the [ILP Account Information](#ILPAccountInformation). List customers.
2. **[MERC]** Select customer for payment, and initiate a connection over BLE.
3. **[MERC]** Generate IPR with __account__ and __amount__.
4. **[MERC]** Sign the IPR using their Ed25519 keypair
5. **[MERC]** Write to:
    1. `:ipr` with IPR
    2. `:merchantSignature` with Signature of IPR
    3. `:merchantPublicKey` with the Merchant Public Key 
    4. `:merchantCertificate` with the Certificate signed by a Certificate Authority
6. **[MERC]** Write __sign__ to `:action`, to indicate data is ready to be validated/signed.
7. **[MERC]** Listen to notifications on `:status`
8. **[CUST]** Write __"authenticating"__ to `:status`
9. **[CUST]** Validates payload on Characteristics. If:
    1. [CA is NOT trusted:](#) write __"invalid"__ to `:status`. Close connection
    2. [Payment NOT within limits:](#) write __"invalid"__ to `:status`. Close connection
    3. [Certificate NOT valid for ILP address in IPR:](#) write __"invalid"__ to `:status`. Close connection
    4. [Merchant signature is NOT on IPR:](#) write __"invalid"__ to `:status`. Close connection
10. **[CUST]** Wait for Customer authorization (passkey/rhythm/Harry Potter wand...). If:
    1. [Password is NOT valid:](#) write __"unauthenticated"__ to `:status`. Close connection.
    2. [Authentication timeout:](#) write __"unauthenticated"__ to `:status`. Close connection.
    3. [If payment is canceled:](#) write __"canceled"__ to `:status`. Close connection.
11. **[CUST]** Sign IPR using its ED25519 keypair
12. **[CUST]** Writes to (in order):
    1. `:iprPublicKey` with public key
    3. `:iprURI` with the redemption URI
    3. `:iprSignature` with signed IPR
    4. Sends a `notification` on `:iprSignature` so the merchant know the data is ready to be read.
13. **[CUST]** Write __"complete"__ to `:status`. Close connection.
14. **[MERC]** Once notified on `:status` with __"complete"__, If:
    1. [Online:](#) Merchant submits signed IPR, merchant certificate to the customer's submission endpoint. 
    2. [Offline:](#) Merchant MAY accept the signed request as payment, taking the risk that the customer's ledger may not honor the signed request later.

### Future Work

1.  There is no way to tell if `100` is `$100.00`, `$1.00`, or `£100000000.00`.
    It means that tapFi would need to blindly sign anything without having any idea of the
    amount.

2.  An offline device with this protocol would require units in it's own "currency" to validate before
    signing, however the device signing the request would not be able to know either:
    The correct exchange rate, The decimal scale used or The currency.

    IPR should contain information about all those things in order to be safe for a customer, or a 
    flag indicating it's an `offline` payment for security reasons (that way, a ledger could track 
    security breaches better).

3.  There is no expiry IPR's. A payment signed to `Muffins CO.` today, could be executed 2
    years after that. That could be used to exploit exchange rates, by waiting for the "best" 
    time to fulfill payments.